atlas/doc: add getting started with the UI (#560)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/getting-started/04-ui.md

---
id: getting-started-management-ui
title: Using the Management UI
slug: /cli/getting-started/using-the-management-ui
---

### Using the Management UI
Aside from being a command line tool, Atlas also has a user interface that allows us to visually manage our schemas. 

After being introduced to the CLI’s capabilities, let’s see what we can do with the Management UI.

> ###Inspecting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Inspecting
```

We will start off by inspecting our database with the `-w` flag. To do so, run:

`atlas schema inspect -d "mysql://root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/example" -w`

> Our browser will open automatically, and we should see a similar output in the CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our browser will open automatically, and we should see output similar to the one below in the terminal:
```

Atlas UI available at: http://127.0.0.1:5800/projects/25769803777/schemas/1 
Press Ctrl+C to stop
```

> When the UI opens, we are taken to the schema page. This screen displays an overall look of our Atlas schema.

Reviewer: maybe:
```suggestion
When the UI opens, we are taken to the schema page. This screen displays a high-level view of our Atlas schema.
```

![Atlas Schema Synced](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/images/docs/synced-atlas-schema.png)

> On the bottom-right, the schema is described using the Atlas DDL. On the top-right, the “Activity & History'' panel holds an audit history for all changes made to the schema. Each log is clickable, allowing us to view the diff between the schema and its previous state.

Reviewer: When copying from word-processors sometimes these "ugly" quotes are used. In code we always use `"`
```suggestion
On the bottom-right, the schema is described using the Atlas DDL. On the top-right, the "Activity & History" panel holds an audit history for all changes made to the schema. Each log is clickable, allowing us to view the diff between the schema and its previous state.
```

> On the bottom-right, the schema is described using the Atlas DDL. On the top-right, the “Activity & History'' panel holds an audit history for all changes made to the schema. Each log is clickable, allowing us to view the diff between the schema and its previous state.

Reviewer: maybe add numbers + labels  on the components and refer to them in the text

> On the bottom-left part of the screen, the UI displays an ERD (Entity-relation diagram) showing the different tables and the connections between them (via foreign-keys). By clicking the “expand” icon on the top-right corner of the ERD panel, we can open a more detailed view of our schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the bottom-left part of the screen, the UI displays an ERD (Entity-relation diagram) showing the different tables and the connections between them (via foreign-keys). By clicking the "expand" icon on the top-right corner of the ERD panel, we can open a more detailed view of our schema.
```
erd - link to Wikipedia or similar source

> On the top-left (1) we can see a box with information about our schema. The "Activity & History" panel (2) holds an audit history for all changes made to the schema. Each log is clickable, allowing us to view the diff between the schema and its previous state. On the bottom-right (3), the schema is described using the Atlas DDL.  On the bottom-left part of the screen (4), the UI displays an ERD (Entity-relation diagram) showing the different tables and the connections between them (via foreign-keys). By clicking the "expand" icon on the top-right corner of the ERD panel, we can open a more detailed view of our schema.

Reviewer: 💯

![Schema ERD open](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/images/docs/schema-erd-open.png)

### Running a migration

> Now that we have visualized our schema using the UI, let’s see how to initiate a migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have seen how Atlas can visualize our database schema in the UI, let’s see how to initiate a migration.
```

> First, we will make changes to our schema by clicking on the “Edit Schema” button on the top right-hand corner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we will make changes to our schema by clicking on the "Edit Schema" button on the top right-hand corner.
```

![Edit Schema Button](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/images/docs/edit-schema-button.png)

Next, add the table `likes` to the schema:
```
table "likes" {
 schema = schema.example
 column "id" {
   null = false
   type = int
 }
 column "user_id" {
   null = false
   type = int
 }
 column "blog_post_id" {
   null = false
   type = int
 }
 primary_key {
   columns = [table.likes.column.id]
 }
 foreign_key "like_blog_post" {
   columns     = [table.likes.column.blog_post_id]
   ref_columns = [table.blog_posts.column.id]
   on_update   = "RESTRICT"
   on_delete   = "RESTRICT"
 }
 foreign_key "like_user" {
   columns     = [table.likes.column.user_id]
   ref_columns = [table.users.column.id]
   on_update   = "RESTRICT"
   on_delete   = "RESTRICT"
 }
 index "like_blog_post" {
   columns = [table.likes.column.blog_post_id]
 }
 index "like_user" {
   columns = [table.likes.column.user_id]
 }
}
```

> Click “save” on the top right-hand corner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click "save" on the top right-hand corner.
```

![Save Schema Button](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/images/docs/save-schema.png)

> Going back to our schema page, we can notice a few changes. Firstly, our schema is now out of sync. When a schema is out of sync, two separate schemas appear: desired and inspected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going back to our schema page, we can notice a few changes. First, our schema is now out of sync. This means we have created a change in the desired state that isn't yet reflected in the database. When a schema is out of sync, two separate schemas appear: desired and inspected.
```

The _desired_ schema is the one being edited in the UI. The _inspected_ schema is the
true, current state of the database. By clicking the toggle and changing the view to "unified", the schema is shown as one with a highlighted diff.

> Looking at the ERD, we can see that our table `likes` is green, showing that it has been added. This means the change has been recorded, but not yet applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking at the ERD, we can see that our table `likes` is green and has a plus-sign (+) next to it, showing that it needs to be added. This means the change has been recorded, but not yet applied.
```
